[RFC] 2024-12-10 Record Decisions (#1)
reichlab/decisions: decisions/2024-12-09-rfc-record-decisions.md

# 2024-12-09 Record Decisions

## Context

> The lab currently known as "Reich Lab" does not have a centralized space for

Reviewer: I find myself feeling a bit defensive when reading this introduction, like it's critical of the current structure and highlights all the problems. I wonder if with a bit of rephrasing we could make it a bit more positive. E.g.

"does not have a centralized place for..." ---> Maybe just bypass talking about what we do and don't have right now and just talk about what we are hoping to create and why it's a good idea?

Author: Sorry about that. I agree that it is possible to present this framework as a continued step forward in a series of forward steps and will reword.

discussion nor does it have a method of recording project architectural
decisions that affect projects downstream. At the moment, discussions take place
across the GitHub repositories in both the [reichlab](https://github.com/reichlab)
and [hubverse-org](https://github.com/hubverse-org) organizations. This has lead
to three distinct concerns:

1. lab members are not made aware of discussions until a decision is made
2. discussion threads that do exist are lengthy and drawn out with no clear
   conclusions (see for example [the discussion of the "target data"
   format](https://github.com/orgs/hubverse-org/discussions/9)) or they may
   be spread around issues in separate repositories

> 3. new lab members do not have context for the motivation of past decisions and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. new lab members may not be able to glean the full context for the motivation of past decisions and
```

>    may not even be aware of who is responsible for individual projects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   may not be able to ascertain who is responsible for individual projects without asking others in the lab
```

> Ultimately this leads to a fragmented project landscape. A decision made

Reviewer: similar to my comment above - just some tonal rewordings:

"This has led to three distinct concerns:" --> "The current setup sometimes leads to challenges in communicating across the landscape of projects in the lab" or something like that

"1.  lab members..." --> "sometimes decisions from discussions with subsets of individuals are not communicated clearly to a wider group"

upstream could negatively impact a downstream project maintained by another

> member of the lab with little notice.Moreover, without a clear record of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
member of the lab with little notice. Moreover, without a clear record of
```

and `project-posters/` folder contains folders for individual projects that will
contain a [project poster](https://www.atlassian.com/software/confluence/templates/project-poster)
that describes what the project is, who the project owners are, why we are
doing it, and who it is for along with any associated artifacts.

### Standard document to record decisions

We will use Architecture Decision Records, as described by Michael
Nygard in [documenting architecture
decisions](https://cognitect.com/blog/2011/11/15/documenting-architecture-decisions)
to establish a standard document to record decisions with the following modifications:

1. decisions will be dated using ISO 8601 format, not numbered.
2. decisions will be in two categories: 
   1. `rfc`: request for comments, which requires feedback before implementation.
   2. `ldr`: lightweight decision record, which is low-stakes and does not require feedback.

### Formal process to record decisions

We will use GitHub Pull Requests as a formal method to record decisions.
Decisions that supersede old decisions will cause the old decision's status to
be "superseded."

> Once a decision is recorded as accepted, only it's status may change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a decision is recorded as accepted, only its status may change.
```

### Central space for recording artifacts associated with decisions

Artifacts associated with decisions (e.g. rendered HTML content, markdown,
figures, data, etc) will be stored in a folder with the same name as the ADR.

```
├─ decisions/
│  ├─ YYYY-MM-DD-ldr-cladetime-nextclade-integration.md
│  ├─ YYYY-MM-DD-ldr-cladetime-nextclade-integration/
│  │  └─ clade-diagram.png
```

> ### Formal process for discussion of new ideas

Reviewer: I like how the project-posters and ADRs are connected. Should we have a requirement that any decision have an accompanying project-poster? Or will there be decisions that are not affiliated with a specific project? I'm not clear on how a "new idea" relates to the specific decisions or project-posters. Could this be clarified somehow?

Author: > I like how the project-posters and ADRs are connected. Should we have a requirement that any decision have an accompanying project-poster?

It is possible that a decision may be related to zero or more projects. That being said, I wonder if it's worthwhile adding a `## Projects` section to each ADR and a `## Decisions` section to each project poster and make sure they are appropriately linked.
